# Automatic loan word extraction for early modern Dutch

Author: Lucas van der Deijl, University of Amsterdam  
Version: 20 December 2019  
Contact: l.a.vanderdeijl@uva.nl, www.lucasvanderdeijl.nl  
Project: 'Radical Rumours' (Funded by NWO 2017-2021)  

## Aim of this program

The aim of this program is to partly automate the analysis of foreign terminology in early modern Dutch texts. It extracts all loan words from a corpus based on three seventeenth-century loan word dictionaries comprising a lexicon of 10,457 distinct loan words.

## Pipeline
The pipeline desigend to achieve the program's aim performs the following steps:

+ Import the required libraries
+ Install the required libraries (if needed)
+ Convert lemmatised Folia-files to .txt (if needed)
+ Define corpus and create outputfiles
+ Extract all loan words from each document in the corpus
+ Visualise most frequent loan words in the corpus

## Required pre-processing

This program assumes lemmatised Folia-files (xml) as input. You can use the Dutch POS-tagging software FROG (available through <a href="https://proycon.github.io/LaMachine/">LaMachine</a> or the <a href="http://portal.clarin.nl/node/14392">PICCL</a> framework supported by CLARIN) to tokenise and lemmatise your corpus. Save the .xml-files generated by FROG into the folder 'Folia_files'. If you would like to work with lemmatised .txt-files as input right away, then you can store the files in the folder Corpus (as .txt-files with character encoding UTF-8). 

You can also extract loan words from non-lemmatised input, but this will result in lower recall scores. Please note that FROG was developed for Modern Dutch and spelling variation in early modern Dutch causes errors in the lemmatisation process. Based on manual annotation of 15,245 word lemmas from 6 sample texts, the recall was estimated at 0.83. 

## Resources

This program uses three seventeenth-century loan word dictionaries to construct a lexicon of 10,457 distinct loan words: Johan Hofman's <a href="https://dbnl.org/tekst/hofm005nede02_01/index.php">*Nederlandtsche woorden-schat*</a> (1650),  Adriaan Koerbagh's <a href="https://dbnl.org/tekst/koer001bloe01_01/index.php">*Een bloemhof van allerley lieflijkheyd sonder verdriet*</a> (1668), and the fifth reprint (1669) of Lodewijk Meijer's re-edition of Hofman's <a href="https://dbnl.org/tekst/meij001lmei01_01/">*Woorden-schat*</a>. Early modern dictionaries are used as a standard because they conveniently take away the need to define and classify loan words anachronistically. There is a strong relation between the three dictionaries: Koerbagh based his dictionary in part on Hofman's and Meijer's dictionaries. For more information on the construction and composition of these dictionaries and their relation to other lexicographers, see: 

+ Leeuwenburgh, B., Het noodlot van een ketter. Adriaan Koerbagh 1633-1669. Nijmegen: Vantilt 2013.</li>
+ Hardeveld–Kooi, I., Lodewijk Meijer (1629-1681) als lexicograaf. Leiden: Dissertation Leiden University 2000.</li>
+ Salverda de Grave, J.J., De Franse woorden in het Nederlands. Verhandelingen der Koninklijke akademie van wetenschappen te Amsterdam, afd. Letterkunde. Nieuwe reeks deel VII. Amsterdam 1906.
